README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/logo-full.png" alt="emroute" width="394" height="80">
</p>

<p align="center">
  File-based router with triple rendering. Zero dependencies.
</p>

---

Every route renders three ways from the same component: as a **Single Page App**
in the browser, as **server-rendered HTML**, and as **plain Markdown**. No
separate API layer needed — prefix any route with `/md/` and get text that LLMs,
scripts, and `curl` can consume directly.

```
GET /projects/42          → SPA (hydrated in browser)
GET /html/projects/42     → pre-rendered HTML
GET /md/projects/42       → plain Markdown
```

## How It Works

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/diagram-full.png" alt="emroute architecture" width="480" height="480">
</p>

One component, three rendering paths:

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/diagram-flow-spa.png" alt="SPA flow" width="320" height="320">
  <img src="doc/diagram-flow-ssr-html.png" alt="SSR HTML flow" width="320" height="320">
  <img src="doc/diagram-flow-ssr-md.png" alt="SSR Markdown flow" width="320" height="320">
</p>

The SPA and SSR HTML flows both call `renderHTML()` — same output, different
delivery. The SSR Markdown flow calls `renderMarkdown()` instead, bypassing
HTML entirely for plain text output.

Routes are files. The filesystem is the config.

```
routes/
  index.page.md              → /
  about.page.html            → /about
  projects.page.md           → /projects
  projects/
    [id].page.ts             → /projects/:id
    [id]/
      tasks.page.ts          → /projects/:id/tasks
  404.page.html              → not found
  index.error.ts             → root error handler
```

A route can be a `.md` file, an `.html` template, a `.ts` component, or a
combination. When a `.page.ts` exists, it controls data fetching and rendering.
When it doesn't, the framework renders the `.html` or `.md` file directly.

```ts
import { PageComponent } from '@emkodev/emroute';

class ProjectPage extends PageComponent<{ id: string }, ProjectData> {
  override readonly name = 'project';

  override async getData({ params }: this['DataArgs']) {
    const res = await fetch(`/api/projects/${params.id}`);
    return res.json();
  }

  override renderHTML({ data, params, context }: this['RenderArgs']) {
    // context.files.html has the companion .page.html template if it exists
    const template = context.files?.html ?? `<h1>\${data.name}</h1>`;
    return template.replaceAll('{{id}}', params.id) + '<router-slot></router-slot>';
  }

  override renderMarkdown({ data, context }: this['RenderArgs']) {
    // context.files.md has the companion .page.md content if it exists
    return context.files?.md ?? `# ${data.name}\n\nStatus: ${data.status}`;
  }
}

export default new ProjectPage();
```

## Features

- **File-based routing** with dynamic segments (`[id]`), catch-all directories, and nested layouts via `<router-slot>`. Routes follow REST conventions: exact routes are terminal resources, catch-all directories own their namespace
- **Triple rendering** — SPA, SSR HTML, SSR Markdown from one component
- **Companion files** — `.page.html`, `.page.md`, `.page.css` loaded automatically and passed through context
- **Widgets** — interactive islands with their own data lifecycle, error handling, and optional file companions (`.html`, `.md`, `.css`). Auto-discovered from a `widgets/` directory or registered manually. `this.element` gives opt-in DOM access in the browser. `<widget-foo lazy>` defers loading until visible via `IntersectionObserver`
- **View Transitions** — SPA route changes animate via `document.startViewTransition()`. Progressive enhancement with CSS-only customization
- **Scoped CSS** — companion `.widget.css` files auto-wrapped in `@scope (widget-{name}) { ... }`. All widget elements get `content-visibility: auto` for off-screen rendering optimization
- **Shadow DOM** — unified Declarative Shadow DOM architecture for SSR and SPA. Widgets render into shadow roots for true CSS encapsulation and Web Components spec compliance
- **SSR hydration** — server-rendered HTML adopted by the SPA without re-rendering. Widgets can implement `hydrate(args)` to attach event listeners after SSR adoption, receiving `{ data, params, context }`
- **Error boundaries** — scoped error handlers per route prefix, plus status pages (`404.page.html`) and a root fallback
- **Extensible context** — inject app-level services (RPC clients, auth, feature flags) into every component via `extendContext` on the router. Type-safe access through module augmentation or a per-component generic
- **Declarative overlays** — popovers, modals, and toasts with zero JS via Invoker Commands API and CSS keyframe animations. Programmatic API available for dynamic content
- **Zero dependencies** — native APIs only (URLPattern, custom elements, Navigation API). No framework runtime, no virtual DOM, no build-time magic
- **Pluggable markdown** — `<mark-down>` custom element with a swappable parser interface; bring your own renderer
- **Redirects** — declarative `.redirect.ts` files with 301/302 support
- **Configurable base paths** — `/html/` and `/md/` prefixes are configurable via `BasePath`
- **SPA modes** — `'root'` (default), `'leaf'`, `'none'`, or `'only'` to control how the server handles non-file requests and SSR endpoints
- **Sitemap generation** — opt-in `sitemap.xml` from the routes manifest with support for dynamic route enumerators
- **Dev server** — zero-config: auto-generates `main.ts`, `index.html`, and route/widget manifests. File watcher with hot reload and bundle serving

## Getting Started

See the [Quick Start](doc/quick-start.md) — one file, one command.

```bash
deno task dev             # start dev server
deno task test            # run tests
```

## Documentation

- [Quick start](doc/quick-start.md) — three files, one command
- [Consumer guide](doc/guide.md) — routing, components, widgets, error handling, SSR, dev server
- [Nested routes](doc/nesting.md) — slot syntax, fallback chains, passthrough pages, catch-all patterns, tips and tricks
- [Markdown renderers](doc/markdown-renderer.md) — pluggable parser interface and setup examples
- [Setting up emko-md](doc/setup-emko-md.md) — WASM markdown renderer with client + server config

### For contributors and architects

- [Architecture overview](doc/architecture.md) — design philosophy, component model, rendering pipeline
- [Architectural decisions](doc/architecture/) — ADR-0001 through ADR-0016
- [Migration guide for 1.5.0](doc/MIGRATION-1.5.0.md) — Shadow DOM, Navigation API, breaking changes

<img src="doc/logo-full.png" alt="emroute" width="197" height="40">

Commit message:

refactor: align Runtime shape with main branch architecture
Move scanning (walkDirectory, scanRoutes, scanWidgets) and manifest
resolution (resolveRoutesManifest, resolveWidgetsManifest) from
BunFsRuntime to the abstract Runtime base class so all runtimes
(including BunSqliteRuntime) can auto-discover routes and widgets.

Server becomes a thin consumer that reads manifests via runtime.query().
Delete server/generator/ — codegen and scanning utilities extracted to
server/codegen.util.ts and server/scanner.util.ts. Sitemap generator
moved to runtime/sitemap.generator.ts.

BunFsRuntime.root resolved to absolute path at construction time.

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/logo-full.png" alt="emroute" width="394" height="80">
</p>

<p align="center">
  File-based router with triple rendering. Zero dependencies.
</p>

---

Every route renders three ways from the same component: as a **Single Page App**
in the browser, as **server-rendered HTML**, and as **plain Markdown**. No
separate API layer needed — prefix any route with `/md/` and get text that LLMs,
scripts, and `curl` can consume directly.

```
GET /projects/42          → SPA (hydrated in browser)
GET /html/projects/42     → pre-rendered HTML
GET /md/projects/42       → plain Markdown
```

## How It Works

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/diagram-full.png" alt="emroute architecture" width="480" height="480">
</p>

One component, three rendering paths:

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/diagram-flow-spa.png" alt="SPA flow" width="320" height="320">
  <img src="doc/diagram-flow-ssr-html.png" alt="SSR HTML flow" width="320" height="320">
  <img src="doc/diagram-flow-ssr-md.png" alt="SSR Markdown flow" width="320" height="320">
</p>

The SPA and SSR HTML flows both call `renderHTML()` — same output, different
delivery. The SSR Markdown flow calls `renderMarkdown()` instead, bypassing
HTML entirely for plain text output.

Routes are files. The filesystem is the config.

```
routes/
  index.page.md              → /
  about.page.html            → /about
  projects.page.md           → /projects
  projects/
    [id].page.ts             → /projects/:id
    [id]/
      tasks.page.ts          → /projects/:id/tasks
  404.page.html              → not found
  index.error.ts             → root error handler
```

A route can be a `.md` file, an `.html` template, a `.ts` component, or a
combination. When a `.page.ts` exists, it controls data fetching and rendering.
When it doesn't, the framework renders the `.html` or `.md` file directly.

```ts
import { PageComponent } from '@emkodev/emroute';

class ProjectPage extends PageComponent<{ id: string }, ProjectData> {
  override readonly name = 'project';

  override async getData({ params }: this['DataArgs']) {
    const res = await fetch(`/api/projects/${params.id}`);
    return res.json();
  }

  override renderHTML({ data, params, context }: this['RenderArgs']) {
    // context.files.html has the companion .page.html template if it exists
    const template = context.files?.html ?? `<h1>\${data.name}</h1>`;
    return template.replaceAll('{{id}}', params.id) + '<router-slot></router-slot>';
  }

  override renderMarkdown({ data, context }: this['RenderArgs']) {
    // context.files.md has the companion .page.md content if it exists
    return context.files?.md ?? `# ${data.name}\n\nStatus: ${data.status}`;
  }
}

export default new ProjectPage();
```

## Features

- **File-based routing** with dynamic segments (`[id]`), catch-all directories, and nested layouts via `<router-slot>`. Routes follow REST conventions: exact routes are terminal resources, catch-all directories own their namespace
- **Triple rendering** — SPA, SSR HTML, SSR Markdown from one component
- **Companion files** — `.page.html`, `.page.md`, `.page.css` loaded automatically and passed through context
- **Widgets** — interactive islands with their own data lifecycle, error handling, and optional file companions (`.html`, `.md`, `.css`). Auto-discovered from a `widgets/` directory or registered manually. `this.element` gives opt-in DOM access in the browser. `<widget-foo lazy>` defers loading until visible via `IntersectionObserver`
- **View Transitions** — SPA route changes animate via `document.startViewTransition()`. Progressive enhancement with CSS-only customization
- **Scoped CSS** — companion `.widget.css` files auto-wrapped in `@scope (widget-{name}) { ... }`. All widget elements get `content-visibility: auto` for off-screen rendering optimization
- **Shadow DOM** — unified Declarative Shadow DOM architecture for SSR and SPA. Widgets render into shadow roots for true CSS encapsulation and Web Components spec compliance
- **SSR hydration** — server-rendered HTML adopted by the SPA without re-rendering. Widgets can implement `hydrate(args)` to attach event listeners after SSR adoption, receiving `{ data, params, context }`
- **Error boundaries** — scoped error handlers per route prefix, plus status pages (`404.page.html`) and a root fallback
- **Extensible context** — inject app-level services (RPC clients, auth, feature flags) into every component via `extendContext` on the router. Type-safe access through module augmentation or a per-component generic
- **Declarative overlays** — popovers, modals, and toasts with zero JS via Invoker Commands API and CSS keyframe animations. Programmatic API available for dynamic content
- **Zero dependencies** — native APIs only (URLPattern, custom elements, Navigation API). No framework runtime, no virtual DOM, no build-time magic
- **Pluggable markdown** — `<mark-down>` custom element with a swappable parser interface; bring your own renderer
- **Redirects** — declarative `.redirect.ts` files with 301/302 support
- **Configurable base paths** — `/html/` and `/md/` prefixes are configurable via `BasePath`
- **SPA modes** — `'root'` (default), `'leaf'`, `'none'`, or `'only'` to control how the server handles non-file requests and SSR endpoints
- **Sitemap generation** — opt-in `sitemap.xml` from the routes manifest with support for dynamic route enumerators
- **Dev server** — zero-config: auto-generates `main.ts`, `index.html`, and route/widget manifests. File watcher with hot reload and bundle serving

## Why Bun?

emroute 1.5.x shipped on JSR (Deno's registry). Starting with 1.6.0, emroute
publishes to npm and targets Bun as the primary runtime.

**TL;DR:** JSR's design freezes the entire module graph at publish time. This
breaks dynamic `import()` of consumer dependencies, peer dependency
deduplication, and runtime resolution of package entry points for bundling — all
things a framework with plugin architecture needs. The npm/`node_modules` model
handles them with zero friction.

Full analysis with documentation and issue references:
[ADR-0017 — Move to Bun ecosystem](doc/architecture/ADR-0017-move-to-bun-ecosystem.md).

## Getting Started

See the [Quick Start](doc/quick-start.md) — one file, one command.

```bash
bun dev                   # start dev server
bun test                  # run tests
```

## Documentation

- [Quick start](doc/quick-start.md) — three files, one command
- [Consumer guide](doc/guide.md) — routing, components, widgets, error handling, SSR, dev server
- [Nested routes](doc/nesting.md) — slot syntax, fallback chains, passthrough pages, catch-all patterns, tips and tricks
- [Markdown renderers](doc/markdown-renderer.md) — pluggable parser interface and setup examples
- [Setting up emko-md](doc/setup-emko-md.md) — WASM markdown renderer with client + server config

### For contributors and architects

- [Architecture overview](doc/architecture.md) — design philosophy, component model, rendering pipeline
- [Architectural decisions](doc/architecture/) — ADR-0001 through ADR-0017
- [Migration guide for 1.5.0](doc/MIGRATION-1.5.0.md) — Shadow DOM, Navigation API, breaking changes

<img src="doc/logo-full.png" alt="emroute" width="197" height="40">
